Introduction:
Image Captioning is the system of producing a textual description for given images.It has been an extremely important and basic endeavor in the Deep Learning space. Picture subtitling has a major amount of use. NVIDIA is the usage of picture captioning applied sciences to create an software to assist human beings who have low or no eyesight. Picture inscribing can be considered as a start to finish Sequence to Sequence issue, as it changes over pictures, which is considered as a grouping of pixels to a succession of words. For this reason, we need to methodology each the language or explanations and the pictures. For the Language part, we utilize intermittent Neural Networks and for the Image part, we use Convolutional Neural Networks to individually accomplish the capacity vectors. Before moving to further chapters let’s understand the about digital imagers and their advantages.An image is visual representation of object. It can be anything from paintings, sculptures, photos etc. The images are in existence from a very long time now. As computers cannot understand images, it became necessary to develop special methods to represent images in computers.

To build this system we followed following architecture where we maintain 2 repositories one of image and other of images's corresponding captions. We pass images and captions through image and language pipeline respectively. Image pipeline is basically a 2 step process of resizing image to 224x224 image and passing it through Resnet50 model to generate feature vectors. In language pipeline, we pass captions and first preprocess them to produce all lower case text, add suffix and prefixes as well. Then captions are passed through RNN models to generate word embeddings and thus feature vectors. Both image and caption feature vectors are then passed through LSTM architecture to build a model.

Once model developed, the site is build on Flask framework which is a light-weight python framework.

Download dataset from https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/srbhshinde/flickr8k-sau run train.py using python3 train.py


